README.md, before:

# PyQInt

[![Conda pkg](https://github.com/ifilot/pyqint/actions/workflows/build_conda.yml/badge.svg)](https://github.com/ifilot/pyqint/actions/workflows/build_conda.yml)
[![PyPI pkg](https://github.com/ifilot/pyqint/actions/workflows/build_wheels.yml/badge.svg)](https://github.com/ifilot/pyqint/actions/workflows/build_wheels.yml)
[![docs](https://github.com/ifilot/pyqint/actions/workflows/docs.yml/badge.svg)](https://github.com/ifilot/pyqint/actions/workflows/docs.yml)
[![Anaconda-Server Badge](https://anaconda.org/ifilot/pyqint/badges/version.svg)](https://anaconda.org/ifilot/pyqint)
[![PyPI](https://img.shields.io/pypi/v/pyqint?style=flat-square)](https://pypi.org/project/pyqint/)
[![License: GPL v3](https://img.shields.io/badge/License-GPLv3-blue.svg)](https://www.gnu.org/licenses/gpl-3.0)

## Purpose

PyQInt is a Python package for calculating one- and two-electron integrals as
encountered in electronic structure calculations. Since integral evaluation can
be quite computationally intensive, the evaluation is programmed in C++ and
connected to Python using Cython.

PyQInt mainly serves as an educational package to teach students how to perform
(simple) electronic structure calculations wherein the most difficult task, i.e.
the integral evaluation, is already encapsulated in a handy set of routines.
With PyQInt, the student can for example build their own Hartree-Fock routine.
Some common electronic structure routine, most notably the Hartree-Fock
algorithm, is also readily available.

> [!NOTE]
> Although PyQInt connects to a C++ backend, it is certainly not optimized for
> speed and might be (too) slow for anything outside of the calculation of the
> electronic structure of simple molecules.

> [!TIP]  
> Interested in other **education** quantum chemical codes? Have a look at the packages below.
> * [PyDFT](https://github.com/ifilot/pydft) is a pure-Python density functional
>   theory code, built on top of PyQInt.
> * [HFCXX](https://github.com/ifilot/hfcxx) is a full C++ code for performing
>   Hartree-Fock calculations.
> * [DFTCXX](https://github.com/ifilot/dftcxx) is a full C++ code for performing
>   Density Functional Theory Calculations.

## Documentation

PyQInt comes with detailed documentation and examples, which can be found
at https://ifilot.github.io/pyqint/.

## Features

The following molecular integrals are supported by PyQInt

- [x] Overlap integral
- [x] Kinetic integral
- [x] Dipole integral
- [x] Nuclear integral
- [x] Two-electron repulsion integral

as well as the following geometric derivatives

- [x] Overlap integral
- [x] Kinetic integral
- [x] Nuclear integral
- [x] Two-electron repulsion integral

PyQInt offers additional features such as
* Performing [restricted
  Hartree-Fock](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Hartree%E2%80%93Fock_method)
  calculations using [DIIS](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/DIIS)
* Calculation of [Crystal Orbital Hamilton Population](http://www.cohp.de/)
  coefficients
* Construction of localized orbitals using the [Boys-Foster
  method](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Localized_molecular_orbitals#Foster-Boys)
* Visualization of molecular orbitals

All routines are (automatically) tested and verified against several open-source
as well as commercial programs that use cartesian Gaussian orbitals.
Nevertheless, if you spot any mistake, please kindly open an
[issue](https://github.com/ifilot/pyqint/issues) in this Github repository.

In the image below, the (canonical) molecular orbitals as found using a restricted
Hartree-Fock calculation for the CO molecule are shown.

![Molecular orbitals of CO](img/co.jpg)

Commit message:

Release v1.0.0 (#49)
* Removing abobuilder

* Removing abobuilder example

* Incrementing version to 1.0.0

* Initial commit paper

README.md, after:

# PyQInt

[![Conda pkg](https://github.com/ifilot/pyqint/actions/workflows/build_conda.yml/badge.svg)](https://github.com/ifilot/pyqint/actions/workflows/build_conda.yml)
[![PyPI pkg](https://github.com/ifilot/pyqint/actions/workflows/build_wheels.yml/badge.svg)](https://github.com/ifilot/pyqint/actions/workflows/build_wheels.yml)
[![docs](https://github.com/ifilot/pyqint/actions/workflows/docs.yml/badge.svg)](https://github.com/ifilot/pyqint/actions/workflows/docs.yml)
[![Anaconda-Server Badge](https://anaconda.org/ifilot/pyqint/badges/version.svg)](https://anaconda.org/ifilot/pyqint)
[![PyPI](https://img.shields.io/pypi/v/pyqint?style=flat-square)](https://pypi.org/project/pyqint/)
[![License: GPL v3](https://img.shields.io/badge/License-GPLv3-blue.svg)](https://www.gnu.org/licenses/gpl-3.0)

## Purpose

PyQInt is a Python-based, teaching-oriented implementation of the Hartree-Fock
method, designed to make the inner workings of electronic structure theory
accessible and transparent. It provides a clear, readable interface to
fundamental components such as molecular integrals over Gaussian basis
functions, SCF procedures (with DIIS acceleration), orbital localization, and
geometry optimization.

What sets PyQInt apart is its educational design philosophy: all matrices,
intermediate results, and algorithmic steps are exposed—allowing students,
educators, and developers to inspect, understand, and experiment with every part
of the computation. Whether you're learning how Hartree-Fock works, developing
your own extensions, or teaching a course in computational chemistry, PyQInt
offers a hands-on, exploratory platform.

> [!NOTE] 
> PyQInt connects to a C++ backend for core numerical routines, but it
> is not optimized for performance. It is best suited for learning, prototyping,
> and small molecule calculations—not production-scale quantum chemistry.

> [!TIP]  
> Interested in other **education** quantum chemical codes? Have a look at the packages below.
> * [PyDFT](https://github.com/ifilot/pydft) is a pure-Python density functional
>   theory code, built on top of PyQInt.
> * [HFCXX](https://github.com/ifilot/hfcxx) is a full C++ code for performing
>   Hartree-Fock calculations.
> * [DFTCXX](https://github.com/ifilot/dftcxx) is a full C++ code for performing
>   Density Functional Theory Calculations.

## Documentation

PyQInt comes with detailed documentation and examples, which can be found
at https://ifilot.github.io/pyqint/.

## Features

The following molecular integrals are supported by PyQInt

- [x] Overlap integral
- [x] Kinetic integral
- [x] Dipole integral
- [x] Nuclear integral
- [x] Two-electron repulsion integral

as well as the following geometric derivatives

- [x] Overlap integral
- [x] Kinetic integral
- [x] Nuclear integral
- [x] Two-electron repulsion integral

PyQInt offers additional features such as
* Performing [restricted
  Hartree-Fock](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Hartree%E2%80%93Fock_method)
  calculations using [DIIS](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/DIIS)
* Calculation of [Crystal Orbital Hamilton Population](http://www.cohp.de/)
  coefficients
* Construction of localized orbitals using the [Foster-Boys
  method](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Localized_molecular_orbitals#Foster-Boys)
* Geometry optimization using Conjugate Gradient
* Visualization of molecular orbitals

All routines are (automatically) tested and verified against several open-source
as well as commercial programs that use cartesian Gaussian orbitals.
Nevertheless, if you spot any mistake, please kindly open an
[issue](https://github.com/ifilot/pyqint/issues) in this Github repository.

In the image below, the (canonical) molecular orbitals as found using a
restricted Hartree-Fock calculation for the CO molecule are shown.

![Molecular orbitals of CO](img/co.jpg)
